They haven't told me anything.
I want to know about my child.
I've never seen a case that really fits this
complexity.
In terms of decline from their peak, I don't
think I've seen anything quite like this.
I don't have any information on him, I don't
know anything.
We need to get people eating.
Fundamentally, we need to get people eating.
That comes, actually, before the politics.
Of course, it does.
The state's a disaster.
This is not a functioning place of sort.
Cops just shoot people in the street, because
they don't trust the penal system.
It's not clear if Maduro falls what would
replace him.
In order to learn how Venezuela went from
being the richest nation in Latin America
to becoming a disaster state, we went directly
to the impoverished nation to speak with the
people living, working, and surviving there
every day.
The minimum wage is five million Bolivares.
You have 3 million in salary, and a two million
food voucher.
But it's not enough, because the basic shopping
basket is well above that amount.
In order to make ends meet, Luis quit school
to find work, so he could buy food for him
and his mother.
Well they're many people who have two or three
jobs and earn a little bit more and it's enough
at least to buy bread on a daily basis.
But in my case, I only have one job and one
wage.
This morning, I only had arepas for breakfast
because I didn't have anything to fill them
with.
I don't know what I'm going to have for lunch
at noon.
I haven't seen what's in the fridge.
In a normal country people don't talk like
this.
I talk to my family members who live abroad
and who live a normal life.
They send me photos.
Honestly, their lifestyle is what every youngster
in Venezuela dreams for.
The story Luis shares is heartbreaking, but
it's not unique to him.
This is the day-to-day life in Venezuela.
People can't buy food, because the cost continues
to rise by over 50% each month.
That's the hyperinflation.
Paper money is essentially worthless.
That's the broken economy.
And the shelves at stores are bare, because
the government keeps reducing imports in order
to try to balance the budget.
That's the corruption.
For clarity on these factors, Real Vision
is fortunate to be working with Jay Newman,
who came to us with this project in mind.
Nobody knows the geopolitical world better
than Jay does.
He's been an investor in developing countries
for over 30 years and was recently profiled
in the Wall Street Journal, saying that the
situation in Venezuela has captured his focus
for a variety of reasons.
Jay and I got to talking, and we realized
stories like Luis' need to be told.
Venezuela is one of those slow-motion train
wreck.
People have seen it coming through years.
They've been part of it for years.
They've watched Chavez and now Maduro for
years.
And for at least a decade, probably even more,
people have said things cannot get any worse
in Venezuela.
And then they get worse every single day,
every week.
So what interested me is the question of how
a wealthy country so close to the US can be
in such dire circumstances to try to understand
what can be done to fix it.
Talk to me a little bit about the emotions
that the leadership of Venezuela elicits when
you consider what's happened?
JN: Venezuela is a country that has tremendous
wealth-- human capital, weather, land, and
it's been destroyed.
And how does bad government take root and
really thrive?
Because in a perverse way, that's what's happened
over the last 20 years, with Chavez and Maduro.
Bad ideas, bad government, and corruption
have thrived.
There has been no more complex situation from
the perspective of geopolitics and debt and
the intersection of geopolitics, economics,
and debt than Venezuela.
And it's important to think about how a country
that has been isolated so dramatically can
be brought back into the Western world, which
is where it belongs.
Being an isolated nation means limited trade
and, therefore, limited resources.
That helps explain why 90% of Venezuelans
are living in poverty.
In fact, the average Venezuelan lost over
20 pounds in 2017.
They're starving.
They're dying.
And the leadership has failed to address the
crisis.
We spoke with leading experts to better understand
the devastating impact of hyperinflation,
which continues to cripple the nation's economy
amid rising rates, low wages, and a failing
currency.
People treat the bolivar like an ice cube.
The minute you get paid, it's an ice cube
that you've taken out of the freezer.
And you better have something to do with that
ice cube, because the longer you wait, the
less of it there's going to be.
Whatever you can get for that ice cube-- ideally,
dollars, because those will preserve their
value much better.
But if you can't find dollars, you buy bottles
of Tide.
You buy cans of soup.
You buy toothpaste.
You buy whatever is on hand, because that's
going to preserve value, either through barter
or resell, much more than the currency is.
That means that money is, for all intents
and purposes, worthless.
Back in 2012, the minimum wage was $192.
Today, the minimum wage is $20.
Furthermore, a cup of coffee cost just under
450 bolivars back in 2016.
Today, the same cup costs over 7 million bolivars,
which is equivalent to about $0.50.
To combat inflation, President Maduro simply
cut five zeros off the currency in August
of 2018.
So those 7 million bolivars are 70 today,
but still represent a 155,000% increase in
the cost over the last year.
And if you purchased $1 million worth of Venezuela's
local currency when President Nicolas Maduro
came to power in 2013, it would now be worth
$2.50 today.
But these are just the numbers.
What does that actually mean in practical
terms?
To find out more, we spoke with Fatima, who
works at her family's bakery in Caracas.
I remember when I was a little girl all the
shelves were full of goods, there were a lot
of products.
And now, we don't even have half of what was
there when I was around 15 or 16 years old.
It's complicated, it's uphill.
We really have to do a thousand things to
be able to subsist, and lend a service to
people.
Because it is more than continuing a business,
it is about the love that we have for everybody.
My dad has been here for more than 23 years,
I'm 24 years old.
Can you believe it?
I have been here since I was a little girl,
and I have known all of our neighbors.
It is very difficult to stop providing a service
or to stop what we have been doing forever.
Part of how you get into hyperinflation is
a government that makes promises that it cannot
keep.
This is an economy that has been devastated,
not just by, I think, autocratic populist
policies, but by a legacy of corruption, and
these are hard things to overcome.
If you're going to print money, and the curve
looks like that, and it's going up thousands
of percent every month, year, whatever compared
to, say, 6% annually in the US, of course,
you're going to get hyperinflation.
Of course, you are.
Another drawback of hyperinflation is a failing
healthcare system.
Venezuelan hospitals are broke, and doctors
are unable to provide patients with proper
care.
It's horrible.
We've had to deal with up to four days without
water here.
We've had to carry water from the floor below,
from the ground floor up here, and well, sometimes
it comes and lasts half a day, or if we're
lucky it lasts all day.
But the lack of water is horrible.
Medical professionals are nervous about speaking
to the press for fear of government retribution.
Carlos Leone, a doctor at the Caracas University
Hospital, agreed to speak with us only from
the safety of his car.
We cannot provide them anything, because there
is no medicine.
There is no running water mostly.
There's no electricity.
Sometimes we do tell the patients you have
to bring your own light bulb to be able to
have light in your room, because the hospital
cannot provide them because of how fast they
sell them.
To know that you could have helped them and
you didn't, because you didn't have a cast
padding, or you didn't have rubbing alcohol,
or you didn't have just the basic, they're
probably going to die.
If you go on Twitter, you can find anxiety-driven
parents whose sick children need some medication
that they can't get hold of, which would be
essentially free to them if it were available.
It's been incredible to watch this unfold
from a country that was relatively normal
when I got there to this, which is worse than
refugee camps I've seen across the world.
It's a real crisis now.
Venezuela, even when I lived there in the
late 2000s or earlier 2010s, politically was
a disaster.
The human rights situation was increasingly
grave, but it was livable.
That is no longer the case.
It's very dangerous.
Nobody goes out at night.
And that's something that has created a siege
mentality that permeates both among the government,
who are worried about what happens if they
ever lose power, and among the population.
To understand what's going on in Venezuela,
let's dive deeper into its past.
Since oil was discovered 100 years ago, Venezuela
has sometimes lived well on wealth derived
from natural resources.
But more often, that wealth has been squandered
or stolen by incompetent or corrupt leadership.
Therefore, Venezuelans saw some benefits when
oil prices were high, but suffered disproportionately
when revenues fell.
In the '90s, funds dwindled, and inflation
and poverty rates rose.
People were restless.
Abuser!
Animal!
And turned to a leader who had served in the
military, attempted multiple coups, and was
seen as a champion of the working man-- Hugo
Chavez.
They just loved seeing somebody on TV or in
person and was talking their language.
It was a very smart move say, hey, let's give
a voice to these people.
And it was phenomenal to see him.
Drawing on Fidel Castro's playbook, Chavez
championed his own brand of socialism, which
became known as Chavismo.
Eventually, oil prices rose, and the state
oil company, Petrovesa, became more profitable.
From there, Chavez was able to dribble out
money into social programs.
But from the very beginning, Chavez and his
cronies used government funds to line their
own pockets.
In addition, social programs often took a
backseat to distributing wealth to Cuba and
other Caribbean nations in order to buy influence
and recognition.
What might have become a nest egg for the
nation to buffer bad times became a money
sink, as Chavez spent well beyond his nation's
means.
In the end, Chavez's policies led to more
debt and even more inflation.
We Venezuelans, we like colorful metaphors.
But it's that for a long time, corrupt politicians
all peed in the pool.
But the Chavez administration was the first
time you could pee off the diving board.
There's no secrets in Caracas.
You could wear Rolexes on a government salary
for all your life, and you were essentially
untouchable unless you crossed some political
boundary.
And then, regardless of whether you'd done
something wrong or not, you were a target.
He had the residual loyalty of having launched
these two coups in 1992 from both the army
and a lot of the population.
And he also had a lot of money, so he was
able to promise much, deliver less, but use,
basically, patronage networks and personality
that resonated to bridge that gap.
Temir Porras: He was somebody who had no schedule.
He could be working between 3:00 AM and 6:00
AM and then be exhausted, sleep, and wake
up and start working on something else.
And it's also extremely challenging for his
opponents.
Because he would basically exhaust his opponents
by always being on the attack.
He was always on execution mode.
As time went on, likely with Castro's encouragement,
Chavez drew more and more inspiration from
disreputable neighbors, like Evo Morales of
Bolivia and Rafael Correa of Ecuador.
These men dealt with their political rivals
through unconventional means.
Chavez took note and became increasingly authoritarian
and went after adversaries who were seen as
a threat to his rule.
Chavez, at times, seems to have also been
working hand in glove with the Colombian terror
group, FARC, to move drugs and to kill rivals.
He had purged most of his lieutenants at that
point.
Most of the most capable members of the United
Socialist Party, if they flew too high, he
would clip their wings, which can be a good
system to make sure you remain in power.
But if you're suddenly gone, it leaves very
much of a vacuum.
The system starts falling apart when Chavez
dies much younger than anybody would've expected.
He was a compulsive coffee drinker.
He smoked.
He gets cancer at a relatively young age,
dies.
He was replaced by Nicolas Maduro, who was,
essentially, a surprise to many of us, in
part, because he was seen as a bit of a comic
figure.
Claudius survived Caligula, killing everybody
by pretending to be mentally disadvantaged.
He was a clown.
Nobody took him seriously.
And for a while, I could could've sworn that
Nicolas Maduro had been Claudius.
That he had been pretending to be completely
inept to survive in the high-risk world of
United Socialist politics in Venezuela.
And that now that Chavez was gone and he had
gotten the nod, he was going to leap into
action.
That never happened.
Machiavelli tells us it's better to be feared
than loved, because fear you can control.
And Chavez was loved.
Maduro has never really been loved, but he
has learned to use fear quite well.
And what the government has done more and
more is use violence to bridge that gap and
to keep the Venezuelan opposition and the
Venezuelan people in check.
So you have sort of an unpopular post-Populism.
Maduro's sole claim to legitimacy, given how
unpopular he is, is that Chavez said this
is the guy.
This is the person, this is the rock on which
my movement is going to continue without me.
And the more he departs from the way which
Chavez did business, even though the world
has changed, the less secure he feels.
But he remains in place, because while unpopular
and broke, the levers of power, his ability
to keep certain key constituencies, including
some of the wealthy or people who have close
relationships to the government and certain
military interests, he's managed to keep them
happy.
A regime change is scary to many leaders within
the military.
Because if a new government were ever come
to power, regardless of how bad this government
gets, a new government might investigate what
happened to history's biggest oil bonanza,
which has disappeared, leaving less than $10
billion in the national reserves.
In recent years, Venezuelan oil production
has fallen off a cliff thanks to statewide
corruption.
Venezuela is estimated to have over $300 billion
barrels of oil-- 20% of the world's proven
reserves.
And in 2008, it produced 2 and 1/2 million
barrels a day.
However, this year, it's estimated that production
may drop by 75% to 600,000 barrels a day.
But the fundamental mistake was made decades
ago when Venezuela chose to focus on the oil
sector to the exclusion of everything else
from agriculture to minerals to tourism.
According to OPEC, Venezuela's oil revenues
account for 98% of export earnings.
So periodically, when oil prices drop, Venezuela
has no other exports to rely on.
That's the one drawback of being a one-dimensional
economy.
Coupled with the degradation of the oil production
infrastructure, it will now take billions
of dollars to revive production.
It would take, I think, conservatively, probably
$15 to $20 billion a year for maybe 10 years
to get it back to where it was pre-Chavez.
Hans Humes: You've got $800 billion of oil
minimum under the ground.
It's a huge economic financial incentive for
people to figure out a way to stabilize things
and increase it.
RK: In oil, they are falling at a rate of
50,000 barrels a month.
Some of that has to be used domestically.
Some of it goes to countries, like China and
Russia, who don't pay cash for it.
Because it's being used either in barter or
to pay off previous debts.
So the actual cash they get from that is collapsing
even more dramatically.
HH: If the central government collapses, then
people are going to be smart enough to cross
the borders, set up an oil field, and start
selling oil.
It's going to happen.
RK: I'd like to see a more diverse economy,
one which is more democratized as an economic
point of view.
That's going to take time.
Every leader of Venezuela, including Chavez
and Maduro, has talked about how important
it is to diversify economically.
The best time to diversify economically is
when you have a lot of extra capital that
you can use to buttress fledgling industries,
and try and find a way to make them competitive
in an ever-more international marketplace.
Venezuela has the world's largest oil reserves,
yet the cheapest gasoline.
In the '80s, Venezuela attempted to raise
the price of gas to stay in line with global
standards.
However, the people revolted, and it's since
been an untouchable aspect of the economy.
Right now, in dollar terms, one buck can buy
you nearly a million gallons of gas in Venezuela.
HH: Oh, my God-- gasoline.
You pull up.
They don't even want to take money at the
gas stations.
Gas is so cheap that the gas station attendants
are like, just give me a couple of eggs or
give me whatever you feel like.
Essentially, gasoline is given away domestically.
We pay, I think, a third of what the Kuwaitis
pay.
HH: With the inflation, you can't have something
like that function, especially if you cross
the border, and gas is normal prices.
You could fill up a tanker truck with gasoline
for $7.
You could sell that 100 meters across the
border for $25,000.
HH: I mean, that's just one illustration of
an entire economy that's totally silly.
[SPEAKING IN SPANISH] Oh, they pay me with
a cookie or a banana; maybe a cigarette.
But I don't smoke, so I give it to someone
else.
The cookie is more expensive, the cigarette
is more expensive, everything is worth much
more.
It can't be possible that a bottle of water
costs more than a liter of gasoline.
Amid the misused resources and the corruption,
crime has become endemic in the country.
73 Venezuelans died in violent deaths every
day during 2017.
That's over 26,000 murders in one year.
And while official stats aren't kept in regard
to abductions, many believe a key driver of
the violence is kidnapping.
To use a personal example, I met my wife during
a kidnapping in Venezuela.
And this was in 2010 when things were a little
bit easier.
And we ended up getting kidnapped by a bunch
of off-duty cops, who then tried to ransom
us off, and beat us up a little, and took
pictures of us to send to our family members
to try and extract as much money as they could.
Not only did they spend time trying to find
out what they could get for us and interrogating
us, which is something cops are trained to
do, one of them took the time to explain to
me why what he was doing was OK.
And that made the facts whatever they might
do to us was justifiable.
They were, in a sense, sort of modern day
Jean Valjean figures, not criminal cops, who
were not killing people in exchange for money.
Cops just shoot people in the street, because
they don't trust the penal system.
And they don't have time to deal with it.
You have opposition or even protesters who
get taken into dark cells with names like
the tomb and then get tortured as a routine
bureaucratic measure.
Violent crime and ongoing corruption remain
a constant across Venezuela.
And as the Venezuelan government refuses to
work with the rest of the world to reach a
solution, the US has turned to sanctions as
a means for encouraging change and punishing
those who remain in power.
Donald Trump: The strong one and the less-than-strong
ones-- and you know what I mean by strong--
every option is on the table, with respect
to Venezuela.
RK: Sanctions have become the Swiss army knife
of American foreign policy.
It's become kind of the go-to tool.
And so you see that when they feel frustration
or anger with what's going on there, there
is this tendency to turn to sanctions and
think what you can do more.
Among the sanctions are a prohibition against
US purchases of Venezuelan bonds.
However, with anticipation of the restriction
one day being lifted, people like Hans Humes
and Jay Newman have considered the investment
opportunities that could emerge.
Yet even Newman, who had a multi-year, multi-billion
dollar negotiation with the Argentinean government,
acknowledges that this is an unusually sensitive
situation.
JN: Creditors are going to be faced with the
need to consider not just their own parochial
self- interest in getting paid, but how to
help Venezuela get back on track.
There are lots of creative ways to do that.
Venezuela has mineral resources.
It has oil resources.
It has agriculture resources.
All of these can be currencies that investors
can be encouraged to invest in in order to
make a bigger pie.
But I think that's something that creditors
are not used to thinking about, and they'll
have to in the case of Venezuela.
HH: There's no way they can manage the economy
worse than they have.
But I think that in order for my investors
to make money, I don't need Venezuela to become
Germany.
I just need Venezuela to become kind of like
Venezuela was before.
RK: If you say, in or out now, I'd say, I'd
rather be in than out, because I do think
there is a recovery story in which you'd do
quite well.
Just losing Maduro and putting someone who
maybe speaks English and hasn't had a lot
of crazy talk about how his dead predecessor
came to him in the form of a bird and told
him what to do—
If you whistle, I whistle.
So I whistled.
The bird looked st me strangely, whistled
a little circled me, and left.
I felt his spirit.
The bar is so low that, really, anything could
see him or be marketed actively as this is
a step up, and now, we're getting serious.
And now, we're going to reform.
TP: I don't think there will be a sustainable
solution if there is no dialogue inside the
country and some sort of political deal that
forces everybody there to respect whatever
decision or arrangement is agreed upon between
the different political forces.
Of course, with participation from the international
community, but it must be solutions from within.
RK: The role that China, Russia, Cuba, India,
perhaps, even too, play in a post-Maduro regime
will be absolutely critical.
I do think the ambition should be to bring
as many of those countries onside in saying,
look, you have an interest in the country.
Leaders change.
And we will embrace a restructuring process
that allows, in a sense, the national community
to be broadly engaged.
As Venezuela becomes increasingly unlivable,
an exodus out of the nation continues, as
hundreds of thousands flee for safety to destinations,
including Colombia, Brazil, the US, and the
Caribbean.
However, in order for recovery to take hold,
the experts believe more must be done to encourage
native Venezuelans to come back home.
If those international skill sets, international
capital, international contact, and international
ethic standards can be brought back into the
government, I think that the chances that
you could have a paradigm shift becomes much
higher.
But the question is, how do you incentivize
people to do so?
Venezuela, for a long time, even after Chavismo
had been there for a while-- and assuming
you weren't working in politics-- was a great
place to live.
Venezuela has a lot to give.
The tourism industry should be huge.
It's got some of the best beaches in the world,
the world's tallest waterfall.
There's amazing jungles and mountains.
It's got everything-- agriculture, and it's
got the oil.
HH: So there's ample opportunity and ample
natural wealth for the country to come back
to what it has been historically.
JN: I think we have to be hopeful.
And I think that it's a place where international
institutions and international relationships
can be brought to bear.
So the IMF, the World Bank, the International
Finance Corporation, all those Bretton Woods
institutions that help countries develop strong
institutions can all play a role.
I think the United States can play a role.
Trade and international relationships are
much more productive than isolationism.
The ultimate goal is to invest in a way that's
productive, that provides jobs, that makes
money for investors.
Because making money for investors is going
to make money for Venezuelans.
The incredible thing is even amid the carnage,
investors see opportunity.
They see a country blessed with incredible
resources and a vibrant culture.
They see a dramatic turnaround happening in
Venezuela.
They see an end to Venezuela's tortuous road
of hyperinflation and starvation.
But the tragedy of it is the situation threatens
to get even worse before it gets better.
And with Maduro, it's like a wall built around
a state of disaster.
Hopefully, one day, true leaders will be able
to go in and help effectively address the
crisis.
For Real Vision, I'm Brian Price.